In the last segment, we saw how to define
a maximum entropy by exponential model
which had parameters which were
the weights of the various features.
In this segment, we're going to look
how we can set those parameters so
as to maximize the likelihood
of observed data.
The log conditional likelihood of a maxent
model is a function of the observed data,
the actual datums in their classes D and
C which we assumed to be
independent likelihood distributed and
the parameters lambda of the model.
And it has the form that we see here.
So this here was the same form for the
model that we saw in the previous section.
And what we can see is that in principle
it's straightforward to work out the log
likelihood of some data but
it's only going to be easy to do in
practice if the number of classes is
reasonably modest because we're
summing over the classes here.
And we'll actually come back to
that issue later in this segment.
We can take this log likelihood and
separate it out into two components.
So here we have what used
to be the numerator and
here we have what used
to be the denominator.
So we can say that the log likelihood of
the entire model is a difference between
the log likelihood of the numerator and
the log likelihood of the denominator.
The derivative of the numerator
is really easy to work out.
We start here with working
out the partial derivative,
the numerator with respect to
each parameter of the model.
And so this is the numerator over here.
And well, first of all we
see that the log exp cancels
out because they're inverses of each
other which gives us the form over here.
And then we simply move
the partial derivative
inside the sum which we can do twice.
We can then move it in here.
And then we ask what
are the partial derivatives
with respect to these lambda i fi terms.
Well, the partial derivative with respect
to lambda i is going to be zero except for
the term that involves lambda i.
And so then, the partial derivative
create that term is simply fi(c,d).
So by summing that up
we get the numerator.
And the thing to notice here
is that the numerator actually has
a very simple and intuitive form.
So what this is calculating is
precisely the empirical count of
feature fi, the derivative of the
numerator is just this empirical count.
Working out the derivative of the
denominator is a fraction more complex,
and you actually need to remember a little
bit of calculus for this one, but
it's not that hard.
So here, we have taken
the denominator term from before,
and we're taking the derivative
of it with respect
to each prime of the weight
that's a partial derivative.
So now first of all we can move
the partial derivative inside the sum,
but then we need to take the derivative
of the log of something.
And so to do that we have
to then use the chain rule.
So the chain rule is that you take the
derivative of the outside function times
the original function times
the derivative of the inside function.
So the derivative of log is
the one on exp function so
we get one on exp of
the original function here.
And then we take the derivative of
the inside function right here.
Working then on that right hand
side we now can move the derivative
inside the sum again and then we gain
the derivative of the exp function.
So at that point, we have to invoke
the chain rule a second time.
So the derivative of exp is itself.
So, then we have exp,
times the inside function here and
then we take the derivative of
the inside function over here.
Okay, so at this point to go
down then to the next line,
what we're doing is we
are regrouping these two terms,
and that gives this part over here.
And then on the right-hand side we're
still working on the derivative of this
function.
And all this time this function has
the same form we saw in the numerator.
Since we've taken
the derivative of this sum.
Here that the only term it's
going to be non zero is the one that
involves lambda i and so then that term
derivative is just fi of c prime d.
And so what we end up with here is this
term looks exactly like our model.
We've got the exp, the same exp for
a particular class over the sum of
the exp of all the different classes.
So what we have here is the model
probability of class c prime and
then here we have the function,
the feature value, of the value c prime.
And so what we're getting at
here the model expectation or
the predicted count of if given
the parameter weights lambda.
So putting those two parts together what
we have is the derivative of the log
likelihood with respect to
a particular parameter lambda i is
simply the difference between the actual
count of that feature minus the predictive
count of that feature according
to our current parameter weights.
And well how do we maximize a function?
We maximize a function
in the standard case
at the point at which
its derivative is zero.
So we want this difference to be zero.
And so then in other words is saying the
optimum parameters of the model are found
when the model's predicted expectation
equals its empirical expectation.
So this optimum is always unique.
The actual parameter values that give it
to you may not be unique, but the value
that is the maximum of the function is
unique because we have a convex function.
And providing you estimate your models
from real data, it always exists.
This is something I'll come back to later.
But these models are also called
maximum entropy models because we
find that what we are actually doing
is finding the model that has maximum
entropy while satisfying these
constraints on the expectations.
Okay, now we know about working
out the partial derivatives for
the conditional log likelihood function.
So to recap, what we then want
to do is choose values for
the parameters lambda1, lambda2, etc.,
that maximize the conditional
log-likelihood of the training data.
And what we find is the way
we do that is to make use of
these partial derivatives in particular
if we take the vectors of all partial
derivatives that gives us
the gradient of the function.
Let's see that in a picture.
So here we are imagining that we have two
parameters lambda one and lambda two and
depending on the settings of those
parameters we get different values for
the conditional log likelihood.
And if we map them out,
we get this kind of likelihood surface.
So, the idea of what we want to do is,
we're going to start with the lambda1 and
lambda2 set to some.
Value and
we can calculate the derivatives,
the partial derivatives at this point.
And those partial derivatives give us
the gradient the direction of steepest
decent on this likelihood surface.
And so we can walk in that direction
a little calculate the gradient again,
walk in the direction of gradient a bit,
calculate the gradient again, walk.
And we can head off and
come to the maximum value of
the conditional log likelihood function.
So for accent models,
this log likelihood surface is
always convex and has a maximum.
But while it looks fairly easy
to maximize in this example,
In the real problems we deal with
there might be hundred of thousands or
millions of parameters, and so
it's considerably more difficult.
So how we solve that problem is
that we find a good numerical
optimization package and
get it to find good parameter values.
In particular, let me just note that
commonly these packages including
the one that we use for the programming
assign that actually minimizes.
So instead you minimize the negative,
the conditional log likelihood
which is equivalent.
Now there are many numerical
optimization techniques.
The simplest is gradient descent,
which just says that you walk always
in the direction of the gradient.
A variant of it is the stochastic version,
stochastic gradient descent.
This one is actually quite effective and
is still often used for big problems.
In the early work on mexent models in
statistics and NLP, people commonly used
iterative proportional fitting methods,
like generalized iterative scaling or
improved iterative scaling, these
aren't used much more anymore, though.
Other standard numerical optimization
methods like conjugate gradient
are quite effective but
the method of choice that's usually
used these days is Quasi-Newton methods.
In particular one well known
algorithm is the L-BFGS algorithm,
which is the one that we
used in our assignment code.
And that's a good method
to use in general.
Okay, so I hope that means you've now
got a good sense of how to calculate
the partial derivatives of
the log likelihood function, and
understand how that can be used to find
the optimal parameters for the model.